
# Ignorance of Mises' Business Cycle Theory Threatens Mankind



We begin by introducing 3 simple concepts which are like a Swiss-army knife of economics.

1. The first and perhaps most important of all: The production of wealth requires the consumption of wealth. For example, if 10,000 men are to spend 2 years producing an airplane factory, they must consume/use the concrete/materials/food/energy/transportation/shelter/wealth that they (as well as their dependents/family) need while they produce the factory.

2. More money does not equal more wealth. Imagine if everyone in the world suddenly had an extra billion dollars. Would this make society wealthier? No. The amount of REAL wealth(goods/services) has not increased by a single toothpick. It would actually lead to less wealth since many people wound stop working/producing seeing their new-found monetary fortune. Would the 10,000 men above be able to produce the factory if instead of having real wealth to use/consume had to consume pieces of paper with dead presidents on them? Of course not.

3. More money leads to and enables higher prices. For example, if there are 1,000 people in an island (BlueIsle) and each has $100 for a total of $100,000 in the island, can anything sell for $200,000? Of course not, even if they all combined their money such a transaction could not happen because there isn't enough money, but what if each person had $500 so that there is now a total of $500,000? Then yes obviously, prices could go up to $500,000. So for general prices to go up there HAS to be more money. And who creates the money and is ultimately responsible for a general increase in prices? Generally speaking, today money is created by governments via their central banks (Federal Reserve in USA) and they are thus responsible for the price increases. Assuming the total amount of money remains stable, if the economy/wealth is expanding, which can only happen if the rate at which goods/services/wealth is produced is faster than the rate at which it is consumed, we expect general prices to go DOWN because the money will sort of get divided among more goods/wealth so less money per item/wealth means a lower price. If the amount of wealth remains stable or grows slower than the amount/supply of money, then we have more money per item, thus higher prices.


### Savings, Interest Rates and the Clueless Mainstream Keynesian Economists

Besides the more obvious function of safeguarding savings and pooling the savings of many people to allow the execution of bigger projects which would have been impossible if entrepreneurs were limited to the few savings/wealth of friends and family, banking/finance and more specifically the phenomenon of 'interest rates' also play a nearly miraculous role. Let's briefly discuss a very simple scenario that shows how banking/finance/'interest rates' work together to achieve this, and also how our the world's mainstream economists, based on the erroneous ideas of John Maynard Keynes, cause the "booms and busts" in the economy that greatly harm the social order.

Assuming interest rates are at around 8-10%, people who have no desire to start a business or have inferior business plans they expect will have a return on investment (ROI) lower than 8%, will be motivated to refrain from consumption/spending, thus increasing the amount of wealth/savings available, and lend their money to banks to earn ~8% interest. The banks are a place where such saved money can be combined, easily accessed and loaned out in different quantities to people who will then trade the money for the wealth needed nourish the consumption of ideas/businesses/restructurings of different sizes. Banks charge borrowers a higher interest than what they pay out to savers/lenders and profit the difference. For example, they lend $1 million to John who uses the money to pay for his business' consumption/costs (employees, equipment, etc.) as it produces (has sales revenue) $1,300,000 worth of stuff thus growing the economic pie by 30% ($300,000 profit). He pays back loan with the 10% interest ($1.1 million) and keeps the $200,000. The Bank pays the savers 8% ($80,000) and keeps the %2 ($20,000) with which to pay-for/nourish its own consumption. Something amazing is going on here. Interest rates motivate the accumulation of wealth and movement of money from minds/CPUs that have inferior ideas that can grow the economic pie slowly (0-8% rate) to minds that have superior ideas and can grow the economy faster (> 10%) thus giving a tremendous sort of 'computational boost' to society. To the economically ignorant, banks/financers/money-lenders, making a living by charging interest without seemingly having to "sweat" seems unethical/immoral, but the economically woke can see how they play a vital role in motivating the accumulation of wealth/savings pairing them with the best ideas and the interest rate is like a barometer that helps decide whether a mind should do the saving (wealth accumulation) or borrowing (consumption as production takes place). It is important to realize that, as the great economist/journalist Henry Hazlitt writes in his classic “Economics in One Lesson”:

>“ “Saving,” in short, in the modern world, is only another form of spending. The usual difference is that the money is turned over to someone else to spend on means to increase [production”](https://fee.org/resources/economics-in-one-lesson/),

and that this increase in production has to be at least large enough to pay back the loan with interest. A society that saves little is sort of stuck in the same cycle of production and consumption and is unable to nourish a new business/idea/restructuring for the time it might take before it produces wealth. Where would our 10,000 airplane factory builders get the wealth to nourish their consumption for the 2 years it would take them to even begin making new planes if others had not saved it? How long would it take for such savings/wealth to exist if savings grow very slowly? On the other hand, a society that saves a lot is constantly making wealth available for superior ideas/businesses/restructurings and thus growing and advancing technologically much faster. 

The more people save, the more money banks will have to lend out and the lower the interest rate will be as banks compete with each other by offering a lower interest rate to lure borrowers. This also means that there is more REAL wealth available to sustain more ideas/businesses, the REAL wealth that savers did NOT consume when they gave their money to banks. If interest rates are at 10%, it does not make sense to borrow/consume to nourish an idea/restructuring that will have a return on investment of less than 10%, but if they go down to 3%, then it does make sense for additional entrepreneurs to borrow and nourish ideas that will yield 10% ROI to profit the 7% difference. Now, VERY IMPORTANT!. What happens if interest rates are lowered, not because more saved/unconsumed wealth is available, but because central banks increased the money supply("bank credit") to "artificially lower" interest rates from the "natural rate" of 10%, to the "artificial rate" of 3%? What happens is that additional projects/ideas which would NOT have been attempted before will now be attempted even though the needed wealth to sustain them to profitable completion will not exist eventually leading to a sort of "bust"/bankruptcies, and partly-finished projects which squandered wealth. Mises has a masterful analogy that goes as follows. At any moment in time given a certain real "natural rate"(again, we assume 10%), there exists enough wealth in terms of bricks/wealth needed to create 100 buildings/projects. If people have really saved more to bring down the interest rate from 10% to 3% there are now more bricks/wealth and 120 buildings/projects can be completed, but if the interest rate has gone down to 3%, not because there really are more bricks/wealth/savings, but because more money has been created, the bases and some scaffolding for 120 buildings is attempted, but eventually, due to the fact that there are now more businessmen with more newly created money which was used to lower the interest rate competing for the same amount of bricks/wealth, the price of bricks (factors of production like labor,land,energy,materials) goes up more than would have otherwise been the case, which eventually causes many entrepreneurs to face the unavoidable fact that there did not exist enough wealth/bricks at the right prices to complete their projects in a profitable way, therefore a sort of bust/chaos and loss of wealth will eventually happen as inevitable bankruptcies occur. Partly finished buildings that are inhabitable are obviously massive losses, and even though eventually perhaps 70 buildings are completed, the wealth/bricks that could have completed an extra 30 was consumed/used to create 50 unfinished ones. Mises summarizes:

>“Credit expansion cannot increase the supply of real goods. It merely brings about a rearrangement. It diverts capital investment away from the course prescribed by the state of economic wealth and market conditions. It causes production to pursue paths which it would not follow unless the economy were to acquire an increase in material goods. As a result, the upswing lacks a solid base. It is not real prosperity. It is illusory prosperity. It did not develop from an increase in economic wealth. Rather, it arose because the credit expansion created the illusion of such an increase. Sooner or later it must become apparent that this economic situation is built on sand.” [Mises L. v., 2006, p. 162](https://books.google.com/books?id=n2o4k-RaWrcC&pg=PA162&lpg=PA162&dq=%22Credit+expansion+cannot+increase+the+supply+of+real+goods%22&source=bl&ots=J353dJWai4&sig=ACfU3U3qt-lnUoUAWnM5YN44aFTFnKCtow&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiYruGqou7mAhUCrp4KHWCxBbcQ6AEwBHoECAgQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22Credit%20expansion%20cannot%20increase%20the%20supply%20of%20real%20goods%22&f=false)