# The Creation and Spread of Information and Superior Morals via Economic Competition

In the socioeconomic order new/superior information arises and spreads largely thanks to economic competition. Economic competition motivates the social order's billions of minds/CPUs to constantly innovate and copy each other's innovations thus continuously generating and spreading superior information, inadvertently reordering society as fast as humanly possible/profitable, turning it into a sort of super-computer which coordinates the transformation of matter into socioeconomic order/life. For example, all private sector orders/companies like BMW, Ford, and Toyota are constantly innovating and copying each other's innovations like power door-locks/windows and more recently electric vehicles thus continuously creating/spreading superior information and subsequent order. Why do they do this? Because potential customers have the freedom to trade their life/order sustaining wealth with the better informed auto-manufacturers/competitors. This in turn motivates all competitors to learn/copy each other lest they not get enough revenue/wealth with which to pay their employees a competitive wage so they leave to join the better informed and thus more productive/efficient orders/companies. This wonderful automatic mechanism is "turned on" or "emerges" from the simple concept, or better said, tradition of 'private property'. Private property gives everyone in our role as consumers the 'freedom to trade' our life/order-sustaining wealth for what we calculate/think is best. This 'freedom to trade/choose' in turn motivates everyone, in our role as producers, to discover how to order ourselves in a manner that produces something society/customers value (our labor, a product/service), which we do by, once again, innovating and/or copying/learning existing ideas/information, in other words, by competing in the economic sense. Most of us simply choose to produce and then trade our labor with a company/order that knows how to further incorporate our labor in a more competitive/profitable way.

Just like in the Olympics we can discover the best athletes in the world due to global competition, so does free-trade among all nations/peoples/orders allows the best ideas to compete/spread globally thus ensuring the best possible global order. As cost-cutting ideas emerge and inevitably spread via competition leading prices to continuously fall, new profitable ideas easily arise and once again spread via competition in an endless cycle of knowledge generation/innovation. For example, computers were once very expensive, but once the price of making them came down enough, people easily realized that every home could have them, which gave birth to our computerized world and the Internet and all the great things that flow from it. The more wealth is produced, the more wealth has to be offered in exchange for labor as companies/orders compete against each other for the labor they need which helps explain why the economic pie grows for everyone. For example, imagine that after a shipwreck you end up in an island where everyone has a machine that can turn dirt into food. Tom wants your labor to build a home, Mark, to build a boat, and Gina to plant a garden. Competition will motivate them to offer you all the food you want and more.  


We should quickly add that morals are simply ways of acting, they are knowledge which also emerges and spreads via economic competition. Companies/orders that hire/nourish/'trade with' lazy, disrespectful, or corrupt people will be less competitive and be inevitably pressured/selected to hire people with better morals which in turn forces everyone to be respectful and hardworking regardless of race, sex, etc. Similarly, it is hard-working, tolerant, courteous people who thanks to competition inevitably force everyone else to be likewise. As Hayek tells us:

>"Competition is, after all, always a process in which a small number makes it necessary for larger numbers to do what they do not like, be it to work harder, to change habits, or to devote a degree of attention, continuous application, or regularity to their work which without competition would not be needed." [(Hayek "Law, Legislation and Liberty, Volume 3: The Political Order of a Free People" 1981, p. 77)](https://books.google.com/books?id=4z7XZJSd0wcC&pg=PA77&lpg=PA77&dq=%22Competition+is,+after+all,+always+a+process+in+which+a+small%22&source=bl&ots=zm-LsEKP0I&sig=ACfU3U1jrV2xSluN9X877kWebemSS02ZAA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiAoY-Ap-7mAhXBl54KHYf6A8oQ6AEwAnoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22Competition%20is%2C%20after%20all%2C%20always%20a%20process%20in%20which%20a%20small%22&f=false)

As millions of Italians, Britons, Germans and others from all over the world came to America, it was ultimately the competition which grows from 'private property' and thus individual liberty/freedom which stripped these people of their otherwise nationalistic/ethnocentric/tribalistic identities and evolved what came to be seen as the classic American character/ethos of wanting to be seen as a reputable/honest businessman/professional who treats everyone with respect and wears a business suit as opposed to older religious/ethnocentric styles. So not only does 'private property' "turn on" or leads to economic competition and other aspects of the market process and resulting social order/civilization, it also evolves our culture/identity to be ideally suited for participation in it. 

And with respect to a culture of enterprise, Hayek again:

>“those who are inclined to argue that competition will not work among people who lack the spirit of enterprise: let merely a few rise and be esteemed and powerful because they have successfully tried new ways, even if they may be in the first instance foreign intruders, and let those tempted to imitate them be free to do so, however few they may be in the first instance, and the spirit of enterprise will emerge by the only method which can produce it. Competition is as much a method for breeding certain types of mind as anything else: the very cast of thinking of the great entrepreneurs would not exist but for the environment in which they developed their gifts.” (Hayek)

Governmental/'public sector' orders, being coerced MONOPOLIES which get their life/order-sustaining wealth through taxes/compulsion are thus immune to the competitive-information-spreading pressures which motivate the private sector to be efficient/innovative so they obviously don’t have to “to work harder, to change habits, or to devote a degree of attention, continuous application, or regularity to their work” 
